.. _tutorial:

========
Tutorial
========

A simple application
====================

Let's start with an 'hello, world' example. It's a small application for
manipulating an SQLite database of counter. Here's the schema:

.. literalinclude:: ../examples/counters.sql
   :language: sql

You'll find that file in the `examples` directory, and it's called
`counters.sql`. Let's create the database::

    $ sqlite3 counters.sqlite < counters.sql

You should now have the database set up.

You'll find the file we'll be working on in the examples as
:ref:`counters-py-example`.

Now let's import some of the libraries we'll be needing for this project:

.. literalinclude:: ../examples/counters.py
   :lines: 3-8

There are a few different thing we want to be able to do to the counter,
such as setting a counter, deleting a counter, listing counters,
incrementing a counter, and getting the value of a counter. We'll need to
implement the code to do those.

One of the neat things about `dbkit` is that you don't have to worry about
passing around database connections. Instead, you create a context in
which the queries are ran, and `dbkit` itself does the work. Thus, we can
do something like this::

    value = query_value(
        'SELECT value FROM counters WHERE counter = ?',
        (counter,),
        default=0)

And we don't need to worry about the database connection we're actually
dealing with. With that in mind, here's how we'd implement getting a
counter's value with :py:func:`dbkit.query_value`:

.. literalinclude:: ../examples/counters.py
   :pyobject: get_counter

To perform updates, there's the :py:func:`dbkit.execute` function. Here's
how we increment a counter's value:

.. literalinclude:: ../examples/counters.py
   :pyobject: set_counter

`dbkit` also makes dealing with transactions very easy. It provides two
mechanisms: the :py:func:`dbkit.transaction` context manager, as
demonstrated above, and :py:func:`dbkit.transactional` decorator. Let's
implement incrementing the counter using the context manager:

.. literalinclude:: ../examples/counters.py
   :pyobject: increment_counter

With the decorator, we'd write the function like so::

    @transactional
    def increment_counter(counter, by):
        execute(
            'UPDATE counters SET value = value + ? WHERE counter = ?',
            (by, counter))

Both are useful in different circumstances.

Deleting a counter:

.. literalinclude:: ../examples/counters.py
   :pyobject: delete_counter

`dbkit` also has ways to query for result sets. Once of these is
:py:func:`dbkit.query_column`, which returns an iterable of the first
column in the result set. Thus, to get a list of counters, we'd do this:

.. literalinclude:: ../examples/counters.py
   :pyobject: list_counters

One last thing that our tool ought to be able to do is dump the contents
of the `counters` table. To do this, we can use :py:func:`dbkit.query`:

.. literalinclude:: ../examples/counters.py
   :pyobject: dump_counters

This will return a sequence of result set rows you can iterate over like
so:

.. literalinclude:: ../examples/counters.py
   :pyobject: print_counters_and_values

By default, query() will use tuples for each result set row, but if you'd
prefer dictionaries, all you have to do is pass in a different row factory
when you call :py:func:`dbkit.query` using the `factory` parameter::

    def dump_counter_dict():
        return query(
            'SELECT counter, value FROM counters',
            factory=dict_set)

:py:func:`dbkit.dict_set` is a row factory that generates a result set
where each row is a dictionary. The default row factory is
:py:func:`dbkit.tuple_set`, which yields tuples for each row in the result
set. Using :py:func:`dbkit.dict_set`, we'd print the counters and values
like so::

    def print_counters_and_values():
        for row in dump_counters_dict():
            print(f"{row['counter']}: {row['value']}")

Now we have enough for our counter management application, so lets start
on the main function. We'll have the following subcommands: `set`, `get`,
`del`, `list`, `incr`, `list`, and `dump`. The `dispatch()` function below
deals with calling the right function based on the command line arguments,
so all we need to create a database connection context with
:py:func:`dbkit.connect`. It takes the database driver module as its first
argument, and any parameters you'd pass to that module's `connect()`
function to create a new connection as its remaining arguments:

.. literalinclude:: ../examples/counters.py
   :pyobject: main

Finally, two utility methods, the first of which decides which of the
functions to call based on a command dispatch table and the arguments the
program was ran with:

.. literalinclude:: ../examples/counters.py
   :pyobject: dispatch

And a second for displaying help:

.. literalinclude:: ../examples/counters.py
   :pyobject: print_help

Bingo! You now has a simple counter manipulation tool.

.. todo:: Connection pools.

.. vim:set tw=74:
